This is a Debian prepackaged version of the BSD games package.

This package was put together by Joey Hess <joeyh@debian.org>, using
sources from:
	ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/Linux/games/bsd-games-*.tar.gz

I believe that the following copyrights and licence terms apply to the
games distributed in bsd-games and bsd-games-non-free.  (The copyright
years given below are those that appear on any of the files so
licensed.)

Most games are under the standard BSD terms:

   Copyright (c) 1980, 1982, 1983, 1985-1994
  	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
   modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
   are met:
   1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
   2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
      documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
   3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
      must display the following acknowledgement:
  	This product includes software developed by the University of
  	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
   4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
      may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
      without specific prior written permission.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
   ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
   ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
   FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
   DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
   OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
   HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
   LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
   OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
   SUCH DAMAGE.

The files "backgammon/backgammon/backlocal.h", "countmail/countmail"
and "robots/auto.c" have a similar licence, but copyright is held by
the NetBSD Foundation:

   Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
   All rights reserved.

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
   modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
   are met:
   1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
   2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
      documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
   3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
      must display the following acknowledgement:
          This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
          Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
   4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
      contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
      from this software without specific prior written permission.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
   ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
   TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
   PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
   BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
   CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
   SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
   INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
   CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
   ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
   POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

In the case of "adventure/extern.h" and "hack/extern.h" the copyright
is held by Christos Zoulas:

   Copyright (c) 1997 Christos Zoulas.  All rights reserved.

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
   modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
   are met:
   1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
   2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
      documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
   3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
      must display the following acknowledgement:
  	This product includes software developed by Christos Zoulas.
   4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
      derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
   OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
   IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
   INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
   NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
   DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
   THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
   (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
   THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

In the case of "countmail/countmail.6" the copyright is held by
Matthew R. Green:

   Copyright (c) 1997 Matthew R. Green
   All rights reserved.

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
   modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
   are met:
   1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
   2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
      documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
   3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
      derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
   OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
   IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
   INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
   LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
   AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
   OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
   OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
   SUCH DAMAGE.

In the case of "wargames/wargames.6", the copyright is held by Joey
Hess:

   Copyright (c) 1998 Joey Hess
   All rights reserved.

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
   modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
   are met:
   1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
   2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
      documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
   3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
      derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
   OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
   IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
   INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
   LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
   AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
   OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
   OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
   SUCH DAMAGE.

The game "atc" bears additional notices in the name of Ed James:

   Copyright (c) 1987 by Ed James, UC Berkeley.  All rights reserved.

   Copy permission is hereby granted provided that this notice is
   retained on all partial or complete copies.

   For more info on this and all of my stuff, mail edjames@berkeley.edu.

The game "boggle" used to bear a copyright notice in the name of Barry
Brachman, but he confirmed that he had assigned his copyright to the
University of California and the continued inclusion of the old
copyright notice was an omission on their part.

The game "hunt" appears to be copyrighted by its authors and the
University of California:

   Copyright (c) 1985 Conrad C. Huang, Gregory S. Couch, Kenneth C.R.C. Arnold
   San Francisco, California

   Copyright (c) 1983, 1985 Regents of the University of California.
   All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
   specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.

   Hunt is part of the user-contributed software distributed by
   Berkeley in 4BSD.  The sources are copyrighted by the authors
   and the University of California.  You may redistribute freely
   as long as the copyright notices are retained.

These terms also apply to "hunt/Makeconfig", which is derived from the
hunt "Makefile.inc" distributed by NetBSD.

The game "phantasia" is not copyright (except for
"phantasia/pathnames.h.in" to which the BSD copyright and licence
apply); the notice in "phantasia/COPYRIGHT" applies to it.

The game "wtf" is also not copyright, and bears the notice

   Public domain

The game "rogue" (in bsd-games-non-free) bears the standard BSD
notices, and then the following:

   This source herein may be modified and/or distributed by anybody who
   so desires, with the following restrictions:
      1.)  No portion of this notice shall be removed.
      2.)  Credit shall not be taken for the creation of this source.
      3.)  This code is not to be traded, sold, or used for personal
           gain or profit.

The following applies to the game "hack" (in bsd-games-non-free):

   Hack 1.0.3 is copyright (c) Andries Brouwer, Stichting Mathematich Centrum,
   Amsterdam, 1985.
   Unchanged source and source changed to adapt it to a changing environment
   (operating system, libraries, compiler) may be freely distributed.

This has been clarified by Andries Brouwer:

   Clearly the idea was that it is allowed to go from termcap to terminfo,
   but requires explicit permission to add new monsters.

and, on distribution of binaries:

   The old license does not talk about such things.
   As far as I am concerned a binary is just a very inconvenient
   form of source, so would have the same restrictions:
   you may use a hex editor to patch the default location of the
   auxiliary files, but not to change the probability of finding
   a wand of wishing. Binaries compiled straight from the source
   or modified in an allowed way may be freely distributed :-)

Some historical information from the permission letter to BSD:

   Concerning the history of this material: Jay Fenlason and some
   friends from Lincolnsudbury wrote a program called `hack'; this
   program was included in the lincolnsudbury software distribution.
   I was game master at our site at the time we received this
   distribution, and installed it. Players here complained about
   the many bugs this program had, and came with new suggestions,
   and following their suggestions (mostly those of my brother), I
   changed more and more and added more and more. Today the source
   is several times larger than it was originally, and very few, if
   any, lines of the original source remain. 
   I leave it to jour judgement whether this state of affairs means
   that also Fenlason's permission is required for distribution.
   Many other people made smaller contributions; usually their names
   can be found in the sources. All these contributions are in the
   public domain.

"hack/pathnames.h" bears a BSD copyright notice and licence;
"hack/hack.tty.c" bears one in addition to that in the name of the
Stichting Mathematisch Centrum; "hack/extern.h" bears the notice in
the name of Christos Zoulas listed above.

Auxiliary and data files, distributed with the games in NetBSD, but
not bearing copyright notices, probably fall under the terms of the
UCB or NetBSD copyrights and licences.  The file "fortune/Notes"
contains a warning in regard to the fortune databases.

Some files, beyond those present in NetBSD, have been added to the
Linux bsd-games collection.  The following terms apply to the files in
the "include" and "lib" directories (relevant to binary distributions
insofar as they get compiled into the games; note that the include
files are probably irrelevant for this purpose as it is unlikely they
are significant enough to make any binary a derived work).

   Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000 Joseph Samuel Myers.
   All rights reserved.

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
   modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
   are met:
   1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
   2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
      documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
   3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
      derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
   OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
   IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
   INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
   LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
   AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
   OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
   OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
   SUCH DAMAGE.

The above terms also apply to the scripts, makefile fragments and
documentation added to the Linux bsd-games collection which are not
significantly derived from bsd-games 1.3 by Curt Olson and Andy Tefft;
this is all of them except for the files mentioned below to which the
similar terms given below are expected to apply.  This includes the
testsuite scripts; the testsuite input and output for caesar
("tests/caesar.constin" and "tests/caesar.constout") are from the US
Constitution, so not copyright; I believe the other testsuite expected
outputs are too trivial, or translations of inputs too trivial, to
qualify for copyright; but if not, then the terms given above apply
(and, of course, running the test command gives an identical output
file to which you could apply your own copyright).

The files "bsd-games.lsm", "ChangeLog.0", "THANKS", "INSTALL",
"README", "TODO", "boggle/README.linux", "fortune/README.linux", and
"hunt/README.linux" are still significantly derived from files in the
original bsd-games package for Linux by Curt Olson and Andy Tefft.  It
is expected that the following terms will apply to these files, and to
the compilation copyright on the package as a whole; ***this has yet
to be confirmed with Andy Tefft***:

   Copyright (c) 1993 Curt Olson, Andy Tefft.
   Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000 Joseph Samuel Myers.
   All rights reserved.

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
   modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
   are met:
   1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
   2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
      documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
   3. The name of the authors may not be used to endorse or promote products
      derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
   OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
   IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
   INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
   LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
   AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
   OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
   OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
   SUCH DAMAGE.



Local Variables:
mode: text
End:
