YEAR 2000 STATEMENT FOR BSD-GAMES AND BSD-GAMES-NON-FREE
========================================================

The BSD games, and the Linux port thereof, come with NO WARRANTY, to
the extent permitted by applicable law; see the disclaimers in the
source files for details.  These games are not suitable for use in
mission-critical situations.  The information given below is for
information only, and the maintainer can accept no liability for any
damage that may be caused by any defect in this software or inaccuracy
in the statement below.  (If you bought this software from a
distributor, they may offer a warranty; contact them for any details
of this, or if you want copies of any year 2000 statements on headed
notepaper.)

The BSD games are only one piece of software on a Linux system, and
their year 2000 behaviour must be considered in conjunction with that
of other software on the system; in particular, the C runtime library
(including the math library), the ncurses library, the lex library,
and the kernel, functions of which may be used at runtime, and the
complier, binary utilities, make, yacc, lex and header files used to
compile the BSD games.  I can provide no information concerning the
compliance of these components, or how any non-compliance might affect
the compliance of the BSD games.

To the best of my knowledge, there are no date-related operations in
any of the BSD games, in bsd-games and bsd-games-non-free versions 2.2
or later, which will handle the year 2000 incorrectly; please see the
disclaimer above.  Earlier versions are known to have problems; in
particular, the game with the greatest date dependence, pom (which
determines the phase of the Moon), may handle the year 2000
incorrectly in earlier versions.  However I cannot vouch for the
accuracy of the algorithm used by pom over any particular timescale,
and for accurate information on the phases of the Moon you are advised
to consult the Astronomical Almanac or some other reputable source.
Any further date-related bugs that are found and reported _may_ be
fixed in the ordinary course of subsequent releases.
